New rule: Device motion based changes to the content can also be created from the user interface (#1276)
act-rules/act-rules.github.io: _rules/device-motion-user-interface-7677a9.md

---
id: 7677a9
name: Device motion based functionality can also be operated from the user interface
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that functionality that can be operated by device motion can also be operated by user interface components.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag21:2.5.4: # Motion Actuation (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
  - Accessibility tree
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - João Vicente
    - Carlos Duarte
htmlHintIgnore:
  # https://www.npmjs.com/package/htmlhint
  # (used with `npm test` to ensure validity of code snippets)
  - 'attr-lowercase'    
---

## Applicability

The rule applies to an [HTML document][] with an associated [Window object][] that has an [event listener list][] with one or more [event listeners][event listener] for [device orientation events][device orientation] or [device motion events][device motion].

## Expectation

> For each registered [device orientation event][device orientation] or [device motion event][device motion] in the test target, an [instrument][] is available supporting the same outcomes of the event.

Reviewer: I think that UI components needs to be visible/accessible (but do not require accessible name).
> a part of the content that is perceived by users as a single control for a distinct function

I don't think that something that has `display:none` "can be perceived as" anything given that it cannot be perceived at all.

Author: Agreed. Reinstated the expectations and examples.

## Assumptions

- The motion to operate the device is not used through an [accessibility supported][] interface, which is listed as a valid exception to SC 2.5.4.
- The motion is not [essential][] for the functionality it triggers, which is listed as a valid exception to SC 2.5.4.

## Accessibility Support

_There are no major accessibility support issues known for this rule._

## Background

- [Understanding Success Criterion 2.5.4: Motion Actuation](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/motion-actuation.html)
- [G213: Provide conventional controls and an application setting for motion activated input](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G213.html)
- [DeviceOrientation Event Specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/orientation-event/)

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

> This [HTML document][] that can be operated through the device's orientation to increase and decrease the value of a slider has the same functionality available through `button` elements.

Reviewer: "instrument" is defined as "an HTML element" (https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/960/files?file-filters%5B%5D=.js&file-filters%5B%5D=.md#diff-765403c47c39874f2af13d4ec2e178aaR8)

So, technically, the "instrument" is here the `div`, not the **two** `buttons`…

Maybe it's better (more flexible) to change the expectation and require "a set of instruments" or something similar…

(same on other examples)

---
id: 7677a9
name: Device motion based functionality can also be operated from the user interface
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that functionality that can be operated by device motion can also be operated by user interface components.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag21:2.5.4: # Motion Actuation (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
  - Accessibility tree
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - João Vicente
    - Carlos Duarte
htmlHintIgnore:
  # https://www.npmjs.com/package/htmlhint
  # (used with `npm test` to ensure validity of code snippets)
  - 'attr-lowercase'
---

## Applicability

The rule applies to any [HTML document][] with an associated [Window object][] that has an [event listener list][] with one or more [event listeners][event listener] for [device orientation events][device orientation] or [device motion events][device motion].

## Expectation 1

> For each registered [device orientation event][device orientation] or [device motion event][device motion] in the test target there exists a set of one or more [instruments][instrument] supporting indistinguishable results of those from the event.

Reviewer 2: Same problem as I pointed out for auto-updating. The word "exists" is unspecified. We need to be able to answer "true" or "false" on each expectation individually.

Author: Combined expectations

## Expectation 2

For at least one set of [instruments][instrument] from Expectation 1, all of the [instruments][instrument] in such set meet one of the following conditions:

- the [instrument][] is in the same [web page][] of the test target; or
- the [instrument][] can be found in a [clearly labeled location][].

**Note:** If the set of instruments has more than one instrument, not every instrument of the set needs to be located in the same location.

> ## Assumptions

Reviewer 2: You're making the assumption here that every page with these event handlers attached uses them to operate some functionality. That isn't necessarily true. For example if you're playing a game that uses device motion, the event handlers are likely attached before the game is started. The user may have to click "play" before the actual "functionality" appears. The instrument doesn't need to be available from the start, as long as it's available as soon as you're actually playing the game.

I think this is something that needs to be dealt with in this rule, and not something that can just be assumed. I think the cause of this is the difference between our own definition of HTML web page, which is the page in a single state, and WCAG's definition of Web page, which is that page in any state it can possibly be in.

Reviewer: Hmmm… The expectation is that there are instruments to support the same results as the event.
If the event has no result (e.g. before pressing "Play"), then we need instruments to support no result, which may arguably be OK with no instruments at all…

Maybe all that is needed is to have Expectation 1 be explicit that if the events do nothing, no instrument is actually needed.

Author: Similar to #880 I'll update the expectation to include the possibility of the events not having any result on the test target.

---
id: 7677a9
name: Device motion based functionality can also be operated from the user interface
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that functionality that can be operated by device motion can also be operated by user interface components.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag21:2.5.4: # Motion Actuation (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
  - Accessibility tree
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - João Vicente
    - Carlos Duarte
htmlHintIgnore:
  # https://www.npmjs.com/package/htmlhint
  # (used with `npm test` to ensure validity of code snippets)
  - 'attr-lowercase'    
---

## Applicability

The rule applies to an [HTML document][] with an associated [Window object][] that has an [event listener list][] with one or more [event listeners][event listener] for [device orientation events][device orientation] or [device motion events][device motion].

## Expectation 1

> For each registered [device orientation event][device orientation] or [device motion event][device motion] in the test target, a set of one or more [instruments][instrument] is available supporting the same outcomes of the event.

Reviewer 2: Got a few questions about this:
- "available": what does that mean? In the DOM? On another page? Anywhere on the web? As in, how do we ensure testers will do this consistently?
- "supporting the same outcomes" How do you know that something is the same outcome? Presumably this isn't just limited to "outcomes" that are apparent to the user, but things users might not be aware of too. What does it mean for the outcome of one event to be "the same" as that of another?

Author: - I've added to expectation 1 that the instrument should be located on the same web page. Since this instrument is supposed to offer the same functionality that is available through device motion, it does not make sense that it is located elsewhere (in this regard it is different from the instrument that is required to disable the device motion).
- Since this is an expectation and not the applicability, there is no need to objectively define "outcome" or "same". I agree that there might be some ambiguity regarding the scope of "outcomes". I've added a note clarifying that **all** outcomes resulting from the device motion should be considered. Given that you also expressed concerns about the ambiguity of "same" (I don't think it is ambiguous), I've replaced it with a synonym: indistinguishable.

> ## Expectation 2

Author: As pointed out by @Jym77 the SC requires that the same functionality can be operated through a user interface component. According to WCAG, a user interface component is something that "is perceived by users as a single control for a distinct function". Without expectations 2 and 3 I don't think we can guarantee that.

> ## Expectation 2

Reviewer 2: I disagree. An offscreen skiplink with aria-hidden on it is still a user interface component.

> ## Expectation 2

Author: Can't disagree with that!

## Applicability

The rule applies to any [HTML document][] with an associated [Window object][] that has an [event listener list][] with one or more [event listeners][event listener] for [device orientation events][device orientation] or [device motion events][device motion].

## Expectation 1

> For each registered [device orientation event][device orientation] or [device motion event][device motion] in the test target, a set of one or more [instruments][instrument] is available in the same [web page][] supporting outcomes indistinguishable of those from the event.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we can use the word "outcome" here. That's already defined in ACT and has a different meaning from how it is used here.

Author: Replaced "outcome" with one of its synonyms: "result"

> For each registered [device orientation event][device orientation] or [device motion event][device motion] in the test target, a set of one or more [instruments][instrument] is available in the same [web page][] supporting outcomes indistinguishable of those from the event.

Reviewer 2: If the instrument isn't visible at all times, it sounds like it would fail this rule. That doesn't seem like it should fail the SC though. Especially on mobile apps, it's pretty common for functionality to be organised in menus / popups / collapsable groups. Doesn't seem like that should fail the rule.

Author: Removed the reference to being available in the same page. Replaced it with the same solution that I used here: https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/960#discussion_r423577207

> **Note:** The outcomes considered in this expectation are all the outcomes that result from the device motion operated functionality.

Reviewer 2: This seems like it is specifying something about what an "outcome" is. That shouldn't be in a note.

Author: Removed this note. Check if the rephrasing that resulted from replacing "outcome" with "result" addresses satisfactorily the requirements that led to this note.

The rule applies to any [HTML document][] with an associated [Window object][] that has an [event listener list][] with one or more [event listeners][event listener] for [device orientation events][device orientation] or [device motion events][device motion].

## Expectation

For each registered [device orientation event][device orientation] or [device motion event][device motion] in the test target one of the following is true:

> - **no result:** The registered event does not have results perceivable by the user; or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **no result:** Triggering the registered event does not cause a [visible change][] to the [web page][]; or
```

Perceivable by the user can be ambiguous. Which user? What's perceivable to an AT user is different from what is perceivable to someone without. I think this works better, but we need to define "visual change". We can't use "visible" here as that relies on transparency, but the definition could be fairly similar. Something like this perhaps:

> Visible changes in content occur when the rendered pixels change in any port of the document that is currently within the viewport or that can be brought into the viewport via scrolling.

The rule applies to an [HTML document][] with an associated [Window object][] that has an [event listener list][] with one or more [event listeners][event listener] for [device orientation events][device orientation] or [device motion events][device motion].

## Expectation 1

For each registered [device orientation event][device orientation] or [device motion event][device motion] in the test target, a set of one or more [instruments][instrument] is available supporting the same outcomes of the event.

## Expectation 2

The [instrument][] is [visible][].

## Expectation 3

> The [instrument][] is [included in the accessibility tree][] with an [accessible name][] that is not empty (""). 

Reviewer: I think that WCAG "user component" does not require a non-empty accessible name…
Unless we consider that "is perceived as…" requires an accessible name for the "as…" part.

Author: WCAG's definition of user interface component
> a part of the content that is perceived by users as a single control for a distinct function 

WCAG's example of user interface component
> An applet has a "control" that can be used to move through content by line or page or random access. Since each of these would need to have a name and be settable independently, they would each be a "user interface component." 

From the definition, I would argue that a name is needed for a user to perceive the function. From the example, it's clear it needs to have a name, don't you agree?

Reviewer: Fair enough.

## Expectation 1

For each registered [device orientation event][device orientation] or [device motion event][device motion] in the test target there exists a set of one or more [instruments][instrument] supporting indistinguishable results of those from the event.

## Expectation 2

> For each [instrument][] in the set of [instruments][instrument] from Expectation 1, one of the following is true:

Reviewer 2: Minor issue; if there are two instruments to achieve one function, both of them would be applicable. I think you can reformulate this: "for each test target, at least one instrument from expectation 1 ...."

Reviewer: I see the point but I think it's a bit more complex to formulate.
Take for example a value that can be changed (up and down) by tilting the phone. There can be only 1 registered event for it, but 2 buttons for covering the feature (one for +, one for -). Then **both** buttons need to pass Expectation 2.

On the other hand, if there are 3 buttons to increase the slider, then, yes, only one of these need to pass Expectation 2.

Which might lead into a rabbit hole if the device motion event has a lot of possible outcomes and components to cover these are doing weird partial grouping that overlap 🙃

Author: @WilcoFiers @Jym77 if there are 2 instruments (i1 and i2) that do the same thing we can identify 3 sets that meet expectation 1 (s1 = {i1}, s2 = {i2}, s3 = {i1, i2}). If i1 is "findable" and i2 is not "findable" then s1 would pass expectation and the rule while the other sets would not.

If both i1 and i2 are needed to support the same functionality of the event then we only have s3 and both i1 and i2 need to be "findable".

So, because of the second scenario, we need all instruments to pass expectation 2. But in the first scenario that might cause the rule to fail when s2 and s3 are considered. I think we can address this with an assumption that the instruments in the set (if there is more than one) fulfil different parts of the event's result.

Reviewer: I think you're illustrating only part of the problem I see (and this will lead to a solution)…

Expectation 1 can find several sets. Expectation 2 is about "**the** set from Expectation 1", i.e. implicitly assuming that there is only 1.
I think Expectation 2 should be updated to something like "at least one set from Expectation 1". Needs some heavier rephrasing to get the sentence to be correct 😉 This would solve the cases you explain (Expectation 1 finds s1, s2 and s3 and only s1 passes Expectation 2, which is fine) without need for assumption.

(Weird) case where the assumption is not enough:
3 possible results of the event: r₁, r₂ and r₃.
4 instruments: i₁ does r₁, i₂ does r₂ + r₃, i₃ does r₁+r₂ and i₄ does r₃. 
Then there are 2 sets that match the assumption: {i₁, i₂} and {i₃, i₄} but only one of them needs to be findable.
{i₂, i₃} does not match the assumption, but having it findable (while neither i₁ nor i₄ is) is nonetheless good.

With suggested fix, Expectation 1 would find {i₁, i₂}, {i₃, i₄} and {i₂, i₃} and Expectation 2 would want at least one of them to be findable.

- the [instrument][] is in the same [web page][] of the test target; or

> - instructions for the user to locate the [instrument][] are in the same [web page][] of the test target.

Reviewer 2: I don't think WCAG requires that there are instructions on every page.

Author: @WilcoFiers Yes. Same update resorting to #960 definition of 'clearly labeled location'

For each [instrument][] in the set of [instruments][instrument] from Expectation 1, one of the following is true:

- the [instrument][] is in the same [web page][] of the test target; or
- the [instrument][] can be found in a [clearly labeled location][].

**Note:** If the set of instruments has more than one instrument, not every instrument of the set needs to be located in the same location.

## Assumptions

- The motion to operate the device is not used through an [accessibility supported][] interface, which is listed as a valid exception to SC 2.5.4.
- The motion is not [essential][] for the functionality it triggers, which is listed as a valid exception to SC 2.5.4.

> - If there is more than one [instrument][] in the set, this rule assumes that each [instrument][] fulfils a different part of the event's result. If more than one [instrument][] fulfils the same part of the result, then only one of those [instruments][instrument] needs to meet expectation 2. In this instance, this rule will fail while success criterion 2.5.4 might still be satisfied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If there is more than one [instrument][] in the set found by Expectation 1, this rule assumes that each [instrument][] fulfils a different part of the event's result. If more than one [instrument][] fulfils the same part of the result, then only one of those [instruments][instrument] needs to meet expectation 2. In this instance, this rule will fail while success criterion 2.5.4 might still be satisfied.
```
+ link to SC.

- The motion to operate the device is not used through an [accessibility supported][] interface, which is listed as a valid exception to [SC 2.5.4][sc2.5.4].
- The motion is not [essential][] for the functionality it triggers, which is listed as a valid exception to [SC 2.5.4][sc2.5.4].

> - If the [web page][] is rendering time-based media, rendered pixels and audio will be changing as part of the playback. The comparison in this instance should compare the pixels and audio that are rendered if the event is not fired, with the ones that are rendered if the event is fired.

Reviewer: I think this is not an assumption and doesn't need to be copied in the rule.

> - For the purpose of this definition, it is assumed that the event causing the changes is the only origin of changes to the [web page][] and therefore the page does not change if there is no such event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This rule assumes that the event causing the changes is the only origin of changes to the [web page][] and therefore the page does not change if there is no such event. If this is not the case, changes may be attributed to the wrong event and the rule may fail while [SC 2.5.4][sc2.5.4] is still satisfied.
```

> - For the purpose of this definition, it is assumed that the changes happen instantly after the event firing and therefore the comparison between the page before and after the event firing can be made at any time after the firing of the event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This rule assumes that the changes happen instantly after the event firing and therefore the comparison between the page before and after the event firing can be made at any time after the firing of the event. If there is a significant delay between firing the event and the changes happening, they may not be detected as [changes in content][] and the rule may pass but [SC 2.5.4][sc2.5.4] is not satisfied.
```

</html>
```

#### Passed Example 3

This [HTML document][] can be operated by rotating the device to increase and decrease the value of a slider and the location of an [instrument][] to control the updates is clearly available.

```html
<html>
	<head>
		<title>Passed Example 2</title>
		<script src="/test-assets/7677a9/slider.js"></script>
		<script>
			function activateSlider() {
				document.getElementById('decreaseSlider').addEventListener('click', decreaseSlider)
				document.getElementById('increaseSlider').addEventListener('click', increaseSlider)
				window.addEventListener('devicemotion', handleMotion)
			}
			function openModal() {
				document.getElementById('overlay').style.display = 'block'
			}
			function closeModal() {
				document.getElementById('overlay').style.display = 'none'
			}
		</script>
	</head>

	<body onload="activateSlider();">
		<pre class="output"></pre>

		<h1>Slider Motion Sensor Example</h1>

		<p>
			Open this slider on a device with a motion sensor, such as a smart phone or tablet. Rotate the device to adjust

> 			the slider value. Active the control panel to access decrease and increase buttons that also adjust the value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
			the slider value. Open the control panel to access decrease and increase buttons that also adjust the value.
```
"Active" doesn't sound good (not a verb). Maybe "open", "use", "activate" ?
